[blog] Bringing consistency to Material UI customization APIs (#41040)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/material-ui-early-2024-standardization.md

---
title: Material UI early 2024 API standardization
description: Read about the standardization of Material UI API happening in Q1 of 2024
date: 2024-02-19T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['diegoandai']
tags: ['MUI Core', 'Product']

> card: false

Reviewer: Done ✅ I also updated the tag as we recently removed the "MUI Core" one. It

Tangentially to the card, I wonder if there's room to improve the post's title and description. Couldn't it be more inviting to read? At a glance, I'm unsure what "API standardization" means 😬

> card: false

Reviewer: I like that! A bit longer but much clearer 👌

> card: false

Author: Thanks for the card @danilo-leal  🙌🏼 

I like "Bringing consistency to the Material UI customization APIs" as well, updating

> card: false

Author: Updated

For example, you might want to modify the `Slider`'s thumb element to grow in size when it's dragged:

<iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/nw34ry?view=Editor+%2B+Preview&module=%2Fsrc%2FDemo.tsx&hidenavigation=1"
     style="width:100%; height: 200px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
     title="blog/material-ui-early-2024-standardization/slider-slots-example"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

You can achieve this by providing custom components through the `slots` prop.
The demo above provides a custom thumb component that uses the `Slider`'s internal state `dragging` and `focusedThumbIndex` to change its appearance.
[Open the sandbox](https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/blog-material-ui-early-2024-deprecations-slider-slots-example-nw34ry?file=%2Fsrc%2FDemo.tsx) to see the implementation.

The problem is that this slot pattern exposed through the `slots` prop needs to be standardized.

> Some components implement the `slots` prop, but others have a `components` prop, which works almost exactly as the `slots` prop.

Author: The name was why I added the "almost exactly". It's the only difference. Should we just say it's the same?

<iframe src="https://codesandbox.io/embed/d7xqr6?view=Editor+%2B+Preview&module=%2Fsrc%2FDemo.tsx&hidenavigation=1"
     style="width:100%; height: 200px; border:0; border-radius: 4px; overflow:hidden;"
     title="blog/material-ui-early-2024-standardization/chip-classes-example"
     allow="accelerometer; ambient-light-sensor; camera; encrypted-media; geolocation; gyroscope; hid; microphone; midi; payment; usb; vr; xr-spatial-tracking"
     sandbox="allow-forms allow-modals allow-popups allow-presentation allow-same-origin allow-scripts"
   ></iframe>

You can do this by targeting the `chipClasses.clickable` and `chipClasses.colorPrimary` accordingly.
The demo above targets `.MuiChip-colorPrimary` and `.MuiChip-clickable.MuiChip-colorPrimary` to achieve the result.
[Open the sandbox](https://codesandbox.io/p/sandbox/blog-material-ui-early-2024-deprecations-chip-classes-example-d7xqr6?file=%2Fsrc%2FDemo.tsx) to see the implementation.

The problem is that you could also use the `chipclasses.clickableColorPrimary` composed class, which composes the clickable and color atomic classes.

> These composed classes bloat the API without adding significant improvements.
> For example, this pattern adds 26 CSS classes to the `Chip` component.

Author: Maybe

```suggestion
These composed classes bloat the API without adding significant improvements: For example, this pattern adds 26 possible CSS classes to the Chip component.
```

The composed classes also reduce the predictability of the CSS classes API, as the compose order and which props get composed are arbitrary decisions.
This adds cognitive load to the developers and complexity for maintainers.
The composed CSS classes will be deprecated and eventually removed in favor of atomic class alternatives.

## Standardization process

This initiative aims to improve the developer experience for the Material UI community.

> To provide the smoothest migration from these APIs, they will be deprecated first and removed at a future date, likely the end of 2024.

Author: Removing the date given, we're not sure 😅 what do you think about

```suggestion
To provide the smoothest migration from the inconsistent APIs, they will be deprecated first and removed later, giving you plenty of time to adjust.
```
